
This is the source file from which the README file is generated.

This file is written in Perl's Plain Old Documentation (POD) format.
Run the following Perl commands to convert it to text or to HTML
for easy reading:

  podchecker README.pod  # Optional, check syntax.
  pod2text README.pod >README.txt

  # pod2html seems buggy, at least in perl v5.10.1, therefore
  # I'm using this long one-liner instead (with bash):
  perl -MPod::Simple::HTML  -e "\$p = Pod::Simple::HTML->new; \$p->index( 1 ); \$p->output_fh( *STDOUT{IO} ); \$p->force_title('GDB to JTAG bridge'); \$p->parse_file('README.pod');"  >README.html

This file is best edited with emacs module pod-mode, available in CPAN.
However, the POD syntax is quite simple and can be edited with a standard text editor.

=pod

=head1 About I<< GDB to JTAG Bridge >>

I<< GDB to JTAG Bridge >> is a tool to help debug software running on the OR10 CPU core.

It is based on Nathan Yawn's Advanced JTAG Bridge, please refer to that project for further information.


=head2 License

Copyright (C) R. Diez 2012,  rdiezmail-openrisc at yahoo.de

There are other authors, please consult the source code for details.

The source code is based on Nathan Yawn's Advanced JTAG Bridge, which is turn is based on I<< jp2 >>,
which was distributed under the GNU Public License, version 2. Therefore,
I<< GDB to JTAG Bridge >> is also distributed under this license.

This document is released under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 Unported (CC BY-SA 3.0) license.

=cut
